Story Recapped here. Today,
I’m going to explain a drama,
mystery, sci-fi film called "The Prestige."
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
Robert Angier invites members of his audience
to examine the machine for his next act. One man
from the audience, Alfred Borden, heads below
the stage and waits as Angier's act continues.
Angier walks into the machine as bolts of
electricity envelop him. With the audience blinded
by the light, a trap door opens, dropping Angier
into a water tank in front of Borden. The lock
traps him inside. Before the stage, the audience
is left confused at Angier's disappearance.
Unbeknownst to them, Angier is trapped in the
water tank, begging Borden for help as he drowns.
Days after the performance,
stage engineer John Cutter
stands before the jury. Cutter testifies that
the water tank was used for Angier's first trick,
then was taken off stage. Having seen
Borden making his way below the stage,
he accuses him of setting up the water tank under
the trap door where Angier fell to his death.
Unconvinced with his testimony, the jury demands
Cutter explains the method to Angier's illusion
called The Real Transported Man. Cutter
admits that revealing it would make the
act worthless. The judge suggests Cutter
divulge the secrets to him in private to
make his decision with complete information
without revealing the trick to the public.
Weeks later, Borden is imprisoned and put
under high security due to his skills as an
escape artist. A solicitor named Owens
visits Borden, representing an amateur
magician named Lord Caldlow who wishes to
buy The Original Transported Man's methods.
With the court ordering Borden's daughter
to be removed from his friend's custody,
Owens offers to have Lord Caldlow raise
the child in exchange for Borden's secrets.
As a symbol of good faith, Owens hands
him Angier's diary before leaving.
In his cell, Borden reads Angier's
travels to Colorado in his diary.
In a flashback two years prior, Angier arrives
at Colorado Springs, where the whole town has
access to electricity. He heads to the mountains
to meet Nikola Tesla but is blocked by an
electrified fence. Tesla's assistant, Alley,
recognizes him but refuses to let him meet the
scientist. Unfazed, Angier tells Alley to find
him at the hotel if they change their minds.
At the hotel, Angier reads Borden's journal,
reminiscing when they were merely stagehands
for a magician named Milton. During a show,
Angier and Borden pretend to be audience members
chosen to bind Milton's assistant, Julia. While
he's tying her legs, Angier kisses Julia's leg,
earning a smile from her. Julia is dropped into
a water tank before the curtains fall, hiding
the tank from the audience's view. The curtains
rise, revealing Julia safely out of the tank.
After the show, Borden complains
about Milton's dull tricks backstage.
He claims to know a trick no other magician can
do but refuses to reveal it. Cutter challenges
Borden and Angier to figure out Chung Ling Soo's
goldfish bowl trick, promising a chance to perform
for the top theatrical agent, Mr. Ackerman if
they do. Before they leave, Cutter scolds Borden
for tying the Langford double on Julia's wrists
on the show that could've put her in danger.
Borden insists that his knot is better. With
Borden gone, Cutter then scolds Angier for
kissing Julia's legs on stage, which could
reveal to the audience that she's his wife.
At the Tenley, Borden and Angier watch Chung
Ling Soo's show where he conjures objects,
including a fishbowl, out of thin air. Borden
guesses that Chung Ling Soo is pretending to be
old to hide his props under baggy clothes and a
hunched posture. That evening, Angier tries the
trick Borden claimed but finds it difficult
to walk with a fishbowl under his clothes.
Angier can't fathom the idea of living a lie, as
Borden assumed Chung Ling Soo does. Angier claims
he only changed his name to spare his family
from embarrassment with his theatrical career.
While assisting at a small show,
Borden meets Sarah and her nephew,
who cries for the bird that disappears in the
act. Even when the bird is magically returned,
the boy is convinced the original bird is dead.
After the show, Borden returns the living bird
with the others. He opens the pedestal where
the first bird disappeared and was killed,
just as the boy said. He meets with Sarah and the
boy outside, praising the boy's perceptiveness.
After having lunch with them, Borden walks Sarah
to her apartment, but she refuses to let him in.
He leaves as she enters her home, only
to magically appear in her kitchen.
At the present time, Cutter shows the judge
the machine used during Angier's last show and
the water tank where he drowned. The water tank's
trick lock was replaced by a real one, preventing
Angier's escape. This water tank, Cutter explains,
has a history with both Borden and Angier.
In another flashback years before,
during another one of Milton's shows,
Angier and Borden tie up Julia for the water
tank trick. Borden and Julia share a look,
agreeing to use the Langford double. Julia is
lifted over the tank then dropped. Cutter stands
on the side, ax in hand just in case. When
the curtains aren't lifted after a minute,
everyone gets worried. Cutter pulls the curtains
down, revealing Julia still stuck inside the tank.
Cutter breaks the glass to save Julia, but he's
too late. Julia has drowned inside the water tank.
Days after her death, Angier plunges his face
in the water, hoping to feel how she felt in
her last moments. At her funeral, Angier
demands what knot Borden tied around his
wife's wrist, and Borden lies, saying that
he forgot before leaving with an apology.
Weeks later, Sarah finds Borden
with a strange man, Mr. Fallon,
in her apartment. Borden gleefully announces
that Fallon has provided the equipment he needs
for his first show. Sarah worries about their
finances, revealing that she's pregnant. Borden
shares his bullet catch trick with Sarah, showing
that the bullet is not in the gun when fired.
Borden's show, however, is filled with boos
from the audience. Tired of their complaints,
Borden aims a gun at them, silencing the room.
He chooses a volunteer to shoot him with the gun,
not noticing the man putting another bullet
inside. The man is Angier, still grieving
under his disguise. The tension stretches out with
Angier demanding which knot he tied his wife with.
Fallon attempts to take the gun from Angier,
but he accidentally pulls the trigger.
Borden is shot in the hand,
screaming in pain as Angier leaves.
According to Borden's journal, he told Angier
the truth that night. Angier is enraged,
still unconvinced that Borden doesn't know
which knot he used the night of Julia's death.
Days later, Sarah tends to Borden's wound, which
has barely healed. With two fingers missing,
he can't perform many tricks other than what he's
been keeping, the one he'll be remembered for.
Meanwhile, Cutter and Angier work together,
gathering materials for their show and hiring
Olivia Wenscombe as Angier's assistant.
Cutter invents a contraption that makes a
dove disappear without harming the bird.
They present the trick to Mr. Merrit,
who owns the theater where their first show will
be held. On Angier's show, he wows the audience by
switching two people's handkerchieves from their
pockets. But Angier isn't satisfied with their
reaction. After the intermission, Angier presents
the dove to the audience, who become disappointed,
assuming that it'll be the usual trick. Angier
takes two volunteers to hold the birdcage, and to
his surprise, one of them is Borden. The two lock
eyes as Borden triggers the cage's trap too early,
killing the dove inside and breaking
the other audience member's fingers.
The incident leaves Mr. Merrit
angry, canceling their show for good.
With their show gone, Cutter suggests visiting
a science exhibit to inspire their new act.
In Colorado Springs, Angier deciphers
Borden's journal when Alley joins him.
Angier claims to have discovered the
secret to Borden's greatest trick,
a machine made by Tesla which he hopes to
acquire. Curious, Alley takes Angier to show
their experiment. Up in the mountain, Angier sees
the whole town's lights go out. Tesla provided the
town with electricity in exchange for using the
generators whenever his experiments required it,
such as this night. All around them, the field
illuminates numerous wireless light bulbs,
which harness power from the
generators fifteen miles away.
Months before this, Angier first witnessed Nikola
Tesla's technology during his science exhibit.
Here is when Angier first sees Alley,
who insists on the safety of Tesla's
works despite Thomas Edison's smear
campaign. Among the audience is Borden
gazing at the lightning strikes inside
the hall while the others cower away.
Angier follows him outside the exhibit and
discovers Borden’s wife and baby daughter, Jess.
Jealousy filled him, seeing the family he
could've had with Julia. But when he reads
Borden's stolen journal, he reads that Borden
craved freedom despite the family he built.
At the prison, Jess, now a
little girl, visits her father.
Borden confirms from Fallon that the
court intends to take Jess from him.
Learning this, Borden decides to accept Owen's
offer. Later that day, a guard taunts Borden that
his skills aren't enough to escape prison. Borden
distracts the guard with a ball which clumsily
rolls off his hand. The guard mocks him, not
noticing Borden chaining his foot to the table.
Two years before, Angier is finally
allowed into Tesla's laboratory,
where electricity loudly arcs within
a platform. Walking through the raging
bolts emerges Nikola Tesla. He shakes
Angier's hand while Alley puts a lightbulb
on Angier's free hand. The bulb illuminates in
his palm, conducting energy from their bodies.
During lunch, Tesla recognizes Angier's obsession,
advising him to go home and forget his ideas.
When Angier refuses, Tesla relents as
he'd already begun building the machine.
Months before this, Angier sees
Borden's success in the newspaper.
Olivia warns him about his obsessive
vengeance against Borden. But Angier argues,
unable to accept that the man responsible for
his wife's death is living the life he wanted.
That evening, Angier recounts Borden's newest
trick that astonished him, where he enters
one closet and immediately exits another.
Angier is determined to learn how it's done,
knowing that he can sell it better.
Cutter insists Borden uses a double,
but Angier is convinced it's not that simple. With
no other options, Angier agrees to find a double.
Olivia introduces them to Gerald Root,
a drunk ex-actor who looks like Angier.
Angier is disappointed in the actor, but
Cutter promises that he could make it work.
A month later, while they're practicing the
trick, Olivia and Angier flirt and kiss,
excited for their big show. Cutter presents them
the reformed Root, who walks to the stage drunk.
But when he's performing, Root can
still move as elegantly as Angier.
That evening, Angier presents the
audience with The New Transported Man.
Angier tosses his hat over the air, then
enters one door on the stage and comes
out to catch it on the opposite door.
With the real Angier under the stage,
Root relishes the crowd's applause,
kissing Olivia, which earns more cheers.
After the show, Angier expresses frustration
over being below the stage once the crowd cheers.
He wonders if he and Root can switch
before the performance, but Cutter doubts
if Root can mimic his showmanship to draw the
audience's anticipation. Finding Root drunk,
Cutter shoves him out, fearing someone would
see him, which would destroy their act.
Alone, Olivia kisses Angier, hoping
to celebrate with him properly.
But Angier is distracted, still finding the act
unsatisfying. Hoping to learn how Borden does it,
Angier asks Olivia to spy on Borden, suggesting
that she tell the truth to earn his trust.
Olivia is against the idea, dodging Angier when
he leans for a kiss. But she agrees anyway.
Years after this, Tesla presents his invention
to Angier. Using his hat, the machine produces
electricity until it explodes in light.
But the hat remains as if nothing happened.
Two years ago, when Olivia visits Borden in his
workshop, she confesses that Angier sent her to
learn his secrets. Olivia claims she's had enough
of Angier's attitude and truly wishes to change
sides. Meanwhile, just before another show,
Root demands more money to continue the act.
Not wanting to risk their show, Angier agrees
to pay him more until they get Borden's secrets.
One night, however, Root deliberately
delays appearing on stage,
ruining their performance. He gets this idea from
a man he met at a bar, who hinted how the double
hired for the performance has more power over
the magician. The man at the bar was Borden.
On another show, when Angier steps into the
trapdoor, the cushion under the stage is removed,
causing his fall to break his leg. Instead
of Root at the platform, he finds Borden.
Borden emerges onto the stage, giving the
audience a laugh. In the middle of the stage,
the drunk Root is presented, bound
and gagged, as the crowd laughs at
him. Borden walks down the stage, mocking
Angier and earning the audience's applause.
Furious, Angier confronts Olivia, believing
that she helped Borden sabotage him.
Olivia claims she only did what he asked her
to. Olivia is sure that Borden has a double,
but Angier is still not convinced. To prove
her loyalty, Olivia gives him Borden's journal,
but she needs to bring it back the next day.
When Olivia reminds him that his wife will
never return, Angier lets it slip that he
only cares about uncovering Borden's secret.
The statement surprises even himself,
seeing the man he's turned into.
To save Olivia the trouble, he
breaks into Borden's workshop,
making it seem that he stole the journal from
there. One evening, after a successful show,
Borden finds Angier stalking him. Fallon gets
worried and follows them as well. To get ahead,
Angier cuts into the alley where Fallon follows
him. As Fallon climbs up the stairs, it breaks,
and he falls into a large box where Cutter
traps him inside. Holding Fallon as a hostage,
Angier demands Borden's method for the Transported
Man. Instead, Borden writes him a clue. Angier
takes the clue and directs Borden to a shovel,
telling him to dig to save Fallon's life.
At the hospital, Angier and Cutter check the
note, seeing the word Tesla. Angier beams,
excited to discover Borden's
secrets. But Cutter is tired of
being a pawn in Angier's obsession,
deciding to leave the magician.
At dinner, Sarah is surprised to see Borden bring
along Fallon and Olivia. Borden celebrates as
he's come up with a new trick: to bury
himself alive every night. Unimpressed,
Sarah suggests Fallon and Olivia leave, which
they do. Alone with her husband, Sarah listens
to Borden rant about nearly losing something
dear to him, but he wouldn't share what it is.
After witnessing Tesla's machine fail in Colorado,
Angier reads the part in Borden's journal when
Olivia first came to him. Olivia was angry to
be sent to Borden, feeling used and betrayed
by Angier. As the days went by, Borden knows
he couldn't trust Olivia but fell in love with
her nonetheless. The journal reveals that Olivia
directed Borden to Root, then planted the journal
to lead Angier into a wild goose chase. Borden, in
his journal, mocks Angier for thinking that he'd
reveal his secrets in writing. Angier clutches
the notebook in his hand, his eyes red in anger.
Angier marches to the laboratory, accusing Tesla
of taking his money to fund his own experiment,
not to build his machine. He threatens to bring
Edison's men to them, but Tesla assures him that
he did build the machine; it just hasn't operated
as intended. Hoping to get a different result,
Tesla uses Alley's cat on the machine. The cat
meows as bolts of electricity surround it, but
nothing happens. Disappointed, Angier leaves, the
cat running to the exit with him. Outside, Angier
hears the cat screeching in the field. He follows
the sound and finds dozens of his hats scattered
around. Alley's cat chases after another cat that
looks just like it. Tesla successfully created
clones. This means his machine works. With this
discovery, Tesla promises Angier to perfect it.
Meanwhile, Borden finds Sarah
pouring a drink to drown her sorrows.
Borden promises his love to only her and
Jess, but Sarah doesn't believe him. Later,
Borden meets with Fallon at the park. Borden
suggests Fallon take Jess to the zoo instead
and begs him to convince Sarah that he loves her.
Then, Borden visits Olivia, who greets him with
a kiss. Seeing his face, however, she reminds
him to forget his family while he's with her.
In Colorado, Angier finds Tesla's laboratory in
ruins. Thinking that his investment is ruined,
Angier checks out from the hotel. But the hotel
manager shows him the package Tesla sent. In
his letter, Tesla explains how he fled after
Edison's men came to burn down his laboratory.
He assures him that the machine will work but
advises him not to use it, as it will only
bring him misery. His warning is ignored,
however. Angier eagerly tests the machine,
taking precautions in case there are
still kinks in the process. He activates
the machine and steps inside, allowing
the electricity to fill him with sparks.
In the present, Borden reaches the end
of Angier's diary, where he mocks him,
knowing that he's reading the diary while in
prison. The next day, Borden confronts Owens,
who assures him that the diary is
real. Borden hands Owens his notes,
but they're incomplete. He demands to say goodbye
to Jess before giving them the complete notes.
Months before, Borden's marriage falls
apart due to his affair with Olivia.
Sarah is tired of Borden's lies and secrets.
She demands to know the truth to prove his love
for her, but he refuses, confessing that he did
not love her at that moment. Sick of his lies,
Sarah hangs herself in the
middle of Borden's workshop.
Meanwhile, Cutter meets with
Angier in an abandoned theater.
Angier reveals The Real Transported Man,
which he intends to perform for a show.
With Cutter's help, Angier presents the act to
Mr. Ackerman. Angier enters the cage, surrounded
by crackling bolts of lightning. He disappears
before their eyes only to appear behind Ackerman.
The presentation astonishes Ackerman
into agreeing to fund their show.
One afternoon, Olivia confesses that
Sarah wanted to meet her the day before
she died. Sarah wanted to reveal something
to Olivia, but Olivia was afraid to face her.
Now, Olivia asks Borden what Sarah would have
said. Borden claims that he never loved Sarah,
at least not wholly. He claims to love
Olivia instead, but she isn't satisfied.
Before she leaves, Olivia informs him
of Angier's return, troubling Borden.
On the first night of Angier's show, Borden joins
the audience. Angier unveils Tesla's machine that
fills the stage with lighting, leaving them in
awe. Angier walks inside and disappears before the
audience's eyes. He appears at the balcony behind
the audience, earning him a standing ovation.
Borden panics at this, angrily demanding Fallon
to outsmart Angier. Fallon stalks Angier's blind
assistants as they transport equipment out of the
theater. Still, they can't figure out his trick.
On the night of Angier's death, Borden examines
the machine along with the audience then
infiltrates the set. He heads under the stage
and witnesses Angier drop into the water tank.
Borden tries to break it open with a wrench,
but he's too late. Cutter intervenes,
finding Angier dead. These events lead to Borden
being sentenced to death for Angier's murder.
In prison, Borden is delighted to see Jess,
uninterested in her new guardian at first.
When he raises his eyes to Lord Caldlow, he's
stunned to see Angier's face staring back at him.
Angier smiles, blaming Borden's obsession that
led him there. Borden threatens to leave Jess
out of their battle, which Angier disregards, now
that he can take away someone precious to Borden.
Borden bargains with his secret for the
Transported Man, but Angier tears the note apart,
uninterested. Borden begs for his and his
daughter's life, but it falls on deaf ears.
Angier takes Jess to his manor,
where Cutter waits for him.
In disbelief and fury, Cutter demands
answers on how he's still alive.
Cutter turns his back on Angier, guilty of helping
send Borden, an innocent man, to be hanged while
his daughter ends up with the man who sent him
there. Sarcastically, Cutter asks Angier where he
wants to take the Tesla machine. Angier promises
to make sure the machine is never used again.
In prison, Borden apologizes to Fallon for
going too far and for what he'd done to Sarah.
Borden tells Fallon to live his life for both
of them, tossing his rubber ball to his friend
as he says goodbye. Over the next few days,
Cutter visits Jess in the manor, then delivers
the machine back to the abandoned theater. Borden
walks his last steps to be executed for the crimes
he didn't commit. At the same time, the machine is
lowered under the old theater's stage. Cutter and
Angier push it away into a dark room. Meanwhile,
Borden is prepped for his hanging as his last
rites are read to him. As his last words, Borden
says "Abracadabra" before the trapdoor is pulled.
After Cutter leaves the theater,
Angier hears someone else in the dark.
A rubber ball bounces to his hand, distracting him
from the man who shoots him on the chest. The ball
rolls back to the shooter, revealing Borden's face
under the hat. The truth slowly dawns on Angier.
Borden has a twin brother disguised as Fallon.
The twins switched between the roles of Fallon
and Borden, taking turns for their magic act
and going as far as breaking off fingers to
match the brother that Angier shot at. This
way, each of them gets to live half a life.
One of the brothers, the one in front of Angier
now, loved Sarah while the other loved Olivia.
They've sacrificed living half of each
other's life for their performance.
Bleeding out, Angier reveals how he created
duplicates of himself using Tesla's machine,
killing them every time. But Borden no longer
cares, seeing all of Angier's sacrifice is for
nothing. Angier reveals he only wanted to see the
audience's awe upon his show in his dying breath.
Angier falls back, succumbing to his
wound and finally dying once and for all.
With Angier and Lord Caldlow gone, Cutter takes
Jess into his custody, showing her the birdcage
trick. The living Borden, who has lost half his
life, his fingers, his wife, and his brother,
embraces his deceptive nature and finds his
way back to his daughter, reuniting with her
and fulfilling the promise he made to his brother.
A dark contrast to his twin brother and Angier,
who were consumed by the cost of their deception
and their obsession with fame and fortune.
This has literally cost them their
lives. Borden’s twin hanging in the
gallows and Angier, abandoned in
the darkness beneath the stage,
surrounded by the dozens of water tanks
serving as coffins to his numerous duplicates.